now can you survive on a deserted island
there are plenty of books tv shows and
movies about this scenario
but they all fade compared to the true
story that happened to six young boys
50 years ago
in 1966 an australian man called peter
warner
went to tasmania where he kept his own
fishing fleet
the son of one of the richest men in his
country his heart longed for the sea
and to start his own fishing company
this passion led
him to the remote island of ata a place
he thought was
uninhabited peter traveled around the
islands of the tonga archipelago
as he always did when he saw something
strange on the island
he took his binoculars and examined the
cliff the island was uninhabited
but he noticed burned patches on the
cliffs
it was strange because it wasn't
wildfire season
while thinking peter saw something else
that made him breathless
a long-haired boy ran from the cliffside
and
jumped into the water soon other boys
appeared on the cliff
when the first boy reached peter's boat
he astonishedly
introduced himself his name was stephen
there were six of them on the island
and they'd been there for 15 months the
australian adventurer had a lot of
questions
so they told their story and how they
survived
it all started as boyish mischief a
group of six friends between 13 and 16
years old
wanted to skip a day in school they
picked a time when nobody was watching
them
took another man's fishing boat and
sailed away from all their problems to a
day of fun
what they didn't know was that they were
heading straight into a storm
the boys struggled for their lives for
eight days alone in the middle of the
ocean without a map or a compass
they had no food and no water but on the
eighth day
the boys saw land otta island
when they made it to the land they
discovered the place was nothing like a
paradise island
there were no coconut trees or sandy
beaches this place looked like a massive
rock in the middle of nowhere
this inhospitable island wasn't very
kind to the boys
their boat crashed on the coastal stones
so the minute they got to shore
they were cut off from the rest of the
world
the first days were hardest the young
boys knew they couldn't stay on the
coast for long
another storm could wash them away to
the sea so they started to search for a
way
up the mountain while they were looking
for a path
they built a house and a ledge beneath a
rock it became their
home for another three months
after 100 days of unsuccessful searches
they finally found a way up the climb
took two days
several times they had to stop to take a
rest or turn back
when the road led to an impasse on their
way up
they found old-fashioned knives left
behind by people who had lived on the
island years ago
finally they reached the top it was
nothing like the harsh nature below in
fact the boys were happy to stay up
there in the quiet and windless crest of
the mountain
with tons of fruit trees they managed to
make a fire
by remembering how to light a flame with
simple tools
once the fire was lit they never left it
unattended
so it didn't go out for over a year from
that day on
the teenagers cook green bananas wild
beans
birds or any other food they could find
but
what about water well the kids found a
solution for this problem too
one of the boys remembered how to obtain
water from tree trunks
it took four days to dig deep enough to
get it but
it worked next the boys made a house of
palm leaves and bushes
they moved the fire inside so the rain
couldn't put it out
rats were attracted by the warmth of
their home and would sometimes attack
the hovel
but the boys solved that problem too
they made thick blankets to cover them
at night to protect
themselves from the rats after a while
the boys made an attempt to escape atta
island
they built a raft but it crashed on
coastal cliffs within minutes
after it sailed from the shore that was
when the boys knew there was practically
no way for them to leave the island
but they didn't lose hope that someone
would rescue them
as time went on life on the island
became almost a routine
the teenagers began improving their
lives every day and night
the boys decided to work in pairs they
hunted
cooked meals guarded their home and kept
fire
their life was arranged smartly and
conveniently they planted bean vines
made new banana plantations and used
hollowed-out tree trunks to store water
they even found chickens once kept by
the people that used to live on the
island
so soon they added chicken eggs to their
diet
some days were tougher than others one
night a huge tree
fell inches from their home but the
scariest situation happened during a
bird catching expedition
one of the boys climbed to the cliff top
to find some eggs
he went further than they usually did
hoping to find more nests
when suddenly he slipped and fell off
the cliff
his friends found him below with a
broken leg
the boys helped their friend to climb
back up and took care of them
setting his leg with coconut fronds and
palm leaves
while the injured boy couldn't walk
other boys did his work
letting him rest and recover after four
months the boys could return to duty
the scar on his leg remained but he
could walk again
after six months on atta the boys felt
they'd already spent an eternity on the
island
sometimes they argued but they knew they
needed to rely on each other to survive
whenever a quarrel happened they just
went away in the jungle and spent some
time alone
after that they usually resolved their
conflict peacefully and continued to
work together
when the boys got bored they composed
songs and played handmade musical
instruments
they were often unhappy on the island
but their physical health was very good
they trained and did exercises every day
and sometimes
they even held tennis and boxing matches
four seasons changed but their daily
routine was the same
day by day until suddenly they heard a
cry from the lookout
a boat's coming this was peter warner's
boat
the teenagers did everything to be
noticed one of them ran down to the
shore
and others shouted at the top of their
lawns
the boys swam to the boat as fast as
they could
their greatest fear was that people
would turn back and leave them on the
island
but the boat stayed and soon all six
boys were around the boat
captain warner and his crew didn't put
the ladder down immediately
they were afraid of these wild boys the
castaways weren't wearing any clothing
their hair was long and their faces were
dirty
but they spoke english so they told
their story to the australian man
he believed the boys brought them aboard
and called tonkin authorities by radio
this was the day the boys were rescued
and returned to civilization
when the boat with the survivors
returned to their home island of
hajafiva
almost all the residents were waiting
along the waterfront to welcome them
the boys relatives who thought they
would never see them again
cried from happiness kissed and hugged
their dear sons and brothers
everybody celebrated their return but
something went wrong once the boys went
home
peter saw that the boys didn't show up
for a party in their honor
he soon discovered the boys were in jail
the owner of the boat which the boys had
taken 15 months ago
decided to press charges and the boys
were locked up
but peter warner saved the boys once
again
he thought their shipwreck saga was
perfect movie material
and sold the film rights of the story to
the australian tv channel
he used the money to pay the fishermen
for his old boat
after that the boys were set free
captain warner became a national hero
he even got a message from the king of
tonga his royal highness invited him for
an audience
when captain warner came the king
thanked him for rescuing the boys
and asked what he might want as a reward
peter warner didn't think too long
he asked the king to let him start a
lobster fishing business in those waters
and the king said yes so peter warner's
dream came true
he left his father's company and bought
a new fishing boat
and the boys they became members of his
crew
and sailed around the world with captain
warner